Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Nicole
Prozzi. Last time we talked about so-called porn addiction
and also topics related to sex, sexual. Relationships and
today we're going to talk just a little bit
more about porn addiction and pornography, arousal in the
brain, the no fab movement or no fab groups
and some other related topics. So, Doctor Prazi, welcome
back to the show. It's always a pleasure to
everyone.
Oh, thank you for having me back. I've been
following the show. Looks like you've got some great
folks on.
Great, thank you. So, let me start by asking
you because this is something that, that last time
when we talked about pornography, we didn't really address
a very specific question. Would you say that pornography
is a super stimulus because I hear that from
many people.
Super stimulus actually has a really specific scientific meaning
that porn does not meet. So, the, generally, it's
referring to something that has enhanced features beyond uh
naturally occurring stimulus. Yeah, it's often studied in the
animal kingdom and various, it's not just sexual necessarily,
but any, anything that's kind of above and beyond
uh what normally or naturally occurs with the stimulus.
And porn just doesn't come close to sex or
masturbation for that matter. Uh, THAT is when we
show people pornography in the lab and then have
them direct with the partner, the second there's partner
touch, uh, the responses are much higher. So part
of the argument for a super stimulus is, it's
stimulating beyond, uh, what's already given or what normally
occurs, and that's just clearly not the case with
pornography. It doesn't hold a candle to touch.
Yeah. Oh, by the way, let me ask you
more about that. And since you're a neuroscientist, are
there studies comparing people just watching pornography, just watching
it with, without doing anything with no masturbation and
uh people masturbating and having sex?
Almost all of the studies about sexual arousal are
just showing pornography where touching is not allowed, or
at least we instruct them not to do that.
We don't necessarily watch and check, but we tell
them not to. I think we have the only
data where we actually have pornography viewing in the
same study as where people had partnered touch. But
even then, you can imagine like studying sex in
the lab is hard because you can't just say
go have sex, like what does that mean? It's
very different for every person. So in our case,
when we say sex, it's actually just genital stroking
and just of uh female clitoris. So, uh it's
not sex in the general sense, but that's kind
of the most we have in the lab, and
that would be our study and that's uh partnered
touch compared to pornography.
But are there enough studies to establish a comparison
there, or?
We need far more in that space, and they're
very, very hard to come by because the constraints,
especially in the US around what we're allowed to
do in the laboratory are, uh, I would say
unnecessary. That is the, the barriers to get it
done, um, in part because the protocols don't really
exist yet, that's part of why we're trying to
do the work. Um, SO it's like how do
you argue that you should be allowed to do
something and it's not been done before, um, but
also, uh, some just puritanical constraints. So for example,
labs in the US are sometimes restricted from using
freshmen, but sophomores are OK because somehow there's some
imagined big transition between, you know, being an 18
year old at college and a nineteen-year-old at college
for viewing consensual adult pornography and some of our
protocols, so. Uh, EXAMPLES like that are abundant in
the states of just weird constraints on protocols that
don't really make a lot of sense sometimes.
But from the studies we have, what can we
tell? I mean, is pornography really as arousing as
masturbation or sex?
So that's a remarkable shift. The limited studies we
have which are from our lab as far as
I know. The second someone switches from doing pornography
to touching themselves, the response magnitude is not remotely
close. That's, um, to argue that it's a super
stimulus, like it stimulates beyond what's kind of available
from an actual sexual interaction. It's, it's just not
close, it's not comparable. I think that people who
use super stimulus are Uh, generously uninformed and more
often motivated. They're trying to make claims, they're trying
to create litigation or uh laws against things they
don't like.
So the response is much more pronounced during masturbation
and I would imagine even more pronounced during sex.
Yeah, we don't have a lot of data comparing
all of those in the same protocol, which is
really what you need, but the data we do
have, it's, it's so, uh, the effect sizes are
so large. I feel comfortable saying it's probably replicable.
OK. Does watching more pornography or watching pornography regularly
dampens arousal during arousal response during sex?
There's no evidence that occurs from a scientific standpoint.
If you ask people directly if that occurs, some
people will say they've experienced that. But then when
scientists have gone in and tried to document that
effect, uh, they aren't able to find it. So
even from the people who say they have had
these negative effects from it, and what that raises
is more likely people who are seeking this kind
of stimulation now probably had some or uh it's
as likely that they had some brain difference beforehand.
So, for example, we see people Who have, uh,
who are more sensitive to impulsive behaviors when they're
younger, uh, ultimately engage in more sexual behaviors as
they get older. I would say, you know, they,
uh, they didn't have, uh, sex interactions that caused
the brain to do this. It's like, no, their
brain was kind of already sensitized that direction and
we see some of those differences at birth. I
mean, these are an infants who couldn't have possibly
had, you know, those experiences yet. People are born
with predispositions, and that's reflected in brain activity.
Right, but does the brain, I mean, I'm not
sure what would that mean in terms of neuroscience,
but does the brain distinguish between masturbation and actual
intercourse?
Uh, SO it does in some ways, and there
are a lot of ways we probably just don't
know about cause it's not well studied. And the,
the main part that's not well studied is partnered
interaction, but also masturbation hasn't been widely studied either.
Uh, SO what we have, for example, there's a
difference when another hand is touching your body and
rubbing at a certain frequency that activates the afferent
fibers that are unique to partner stimulation. You can't
do it to yourself. Uh, THERE'S the psychological aspect
of feeling wanted, that's unique to partnered interactions that
you don't experience when you're interacting with yourself, by
definition. So, I think there are some very unique
features that um make me think uh we're likely
to continue to discover some of the distinctions between
those things.
Mhm. So another question about pornography specifically because this
is something that sometimes we hear from uh pornography,
the tractors. This pornography have any effect in the
kinds of scripts people follow during sex?
Uh, THAT is also kind of a cause effect
issue. Uh, PEOPLE definitely are more likely to view
pornography that is consistent with the behaviors they're engaging
in. And so the question is, again, like, did
they already kind of have a latent interest, um,
or did they already have the behavior uh and
did pornography release it or cause them to discover
it? Like what's the exact role? And those are
really difficult to parse. So it's like if I
was kind of interested in Uh, bondage and domination
con um, issues in general. And then I view
a sexual film that has a specific, uh, bondage
or domination behavior that I was like, oh, that
one, like I really like that one and now
I'm gonna go try it. I'd say, well, OK,
but there was a latent interest, but the porn
actual behavior was novel. So where do we say
in that case? Like, was it the person or
was it the um the actual content they viewed?
So there it is absolutely the case that the
scripts people tend to view in porn tend to
be more likely to reflect the behaviors they do
engage in, but it's not at all clear that
that was causative, that they saw the porn and
for the first time ever in their life, they
start to think about doing this new thing.
Right. And I mean, another thing that sometimes we
hear from people who detract porn is that If,
if people watch porn or if they watch it
regularly, I mean, the kind of specific accusation varies
from person to person, I guess, but if they
watch porn, then they can no longer or uh
from a. Certain point on where they can no
longer have normal sex. I mean, they, they don't
feel stimulated the same way. They're not able to
get an erection, something like that. I mean, is
there anything to that claim or
not? If you ask people directly, they definitely make
those claims and that is documented like uh there
are surveys where people said, did porn do this
to you and yes, porn did this to me.
Uh, SO people definitely have that belief. I've heard
that as well. Um, HOWEVER, there have now been
a series of studies investigating this, a number of
mine as well, and we don't find evidence to
support that. So, for example, uh, we looked at
people in the laboratory, uh, actually measured their penile
responses to sexual stimuli, so. You know, if they
have this inhibition or if they've been decommissioned uh
by viewing intense stimuli, they should be less responsive
if they viewed more erotica in their day to
day life, uh, we found the opposite. Uh, THAT
is they tend to be more sensitive, that shouldn't
happen if it's desensitizing. Uh, SIMILARLY, if we, uh,
follow people. And say, OK, you know, if you've
had this interaction with films in the past, you
know, how do you interact with a partner in
the laboratory, you should say, Um, I'm not as
aroused, I'm not as excited. It's the opposite, that
is people who have more real life experience being
pornography report being more excited to interact with a
real life partner. So we think these are likely
just proxies for sexual interest. Uh, THAT doesn't mean
though that someone who views a lot of erotica
might have a lot of sexual anxiety and anxiety
is a well-known, good predictor of erectile dysfunction. So,
Uh, in general, I say if, you know, someone
thinks that may be linked, it's much, much more
likely that there's an anxiety issue that's not just
pornography related. You know, you had some experience that
made you nervous and it's hard to get out
of your head, you know, to not think about
it the next time.
But that anxiety, does it go attached to, for
example, in the case of men, the fact that
they might be afraid that they will not be
able to perform like the men they see in
pornography or perhaps they don't have. Uh, THE same
kind of, uh, penile length as the muscularity,
yeah, attractive partners. So in general, there seems to
have been a shift over time. There was more
documentation of those kind of, um, fears related to
body presentation. Uh, 20 years ago in science, and
what I think has happened is like we don't
see that documented consistently anymore. Studies sometimes don't find
it, they sometimes find the opposite. Like people who
be more poor and feel better about their bodies,
and like that shouldn't happen. Like, if that's the
case. And what I think has occurred is in
the past, there were a few houses that kind
of selected the actresses selected the actors. You only
saw a few that were really, you know, recycled
in a lot of films. And now with OnlyFans
and the explosion of access to these erotic online
content, if you have a small penis, you can
go online and you see someone else aroused by
a small penis just like yours. So I think
because the bodies and content have democratized, they really
become very diverse and it allows you now, uh,
I think, to not have necessarily that effect of
like, oh, you know, I'm too big, I'm too
small, I'm too, you know, all these, uh, natural
concerns a lot of folks have to say like,
no, I saw my body on screen and somebody
was very turned on by it. And that wasn't
happening in pornography 2030 years ago, I think.
So nowadays you get more variety in terms of
body type,
yeah. I don't think there's a lot of debate
about that.
Yeah, and I guess that, that would also work
for anxiety in women, right? Because, I mean, uh,
now you also, we also have more variety for
the women themselves, right, in terms of body type.
Yeah,
and I think we see that in larger media
studies as well. I don't do communications research per
se, but when I read those kind of things,
I'll talk about like the representation and that. It
really spans everything from, you know, swimsuit issues, and
Sports Illustrated, having larger bodies, and, uh, just a
broader representation of like what an attractive body is.
And I think that's useful, you know, it's, uh,
most people when they're viewing pornography, they're viewing it
10 minutes-ish, you know, like it's as far as
what we consume, we see a lot more television,
a lot more. Uh, KIND of print walking around
during our, uh, scrolling efforts, uh, than actual pornographic
content. So I don't think these are necessarily like
unique to pornography, but it may reflect kind of
that broader societal broader representation.
Mhm. Do we know what are the personality traits
of people who watch more porn? I mean, is
there anything in their personality that predisposes them to
watching it more?
And a few folks have done studies of just
viewing, so not like reported problems viewing necessarily, and
it tends to be exactly what you would think,
that is people who tend to be more rewards
seeking in a variety of areas, so. They don't
just be more porn, they're also more likely to
say, I enjoy swinging. I like an open relationship.
I do cuckolding. I am engaged in BDSM, so,
uh, we call it sexual breath, so that is
they tend to engage in a lot of other,
uh, sexual behaviors, not just the porn viewing, and,
uh, outside of that, like personalologically speaking, uh, they
tend to be more impulsive, so that doesn't mean
if you view porn you are impulsive, but there's
a tendency. So these tend to be pleasure-seeking people,
you know, like this is, uh, I'm gonna go
jump out of an airplane. I'm gonna, you know,
I was gonna say streaking. I don't know any
data to support that, but it's the behavior that
came to mind. Jet skis, you know, these are
folks who like those kind of things who the
Novel, pleasure, excitement, uh, generally is appealing to them
in other aspects of their life.
Right, right. And I would imagine they would, they
would score higher on socio sexuality or
Oh, undoubtedly, yeah, I was like I haven't looked
at those uh studies recently, but I can't imagine
that's not a strong correlate.
Yeah. So, uh, and who are the people who
condemn pornography the most? We, last time we talked
a little bit about the people who identify as
porn addicts, and I will have a couple more
questions about that for you, but who are the
ones who tend to condemn porn the most?
There were some interesting papers written a while back
about two groups that were kind of collaborating to
oppose pornography, at least in the states, that was,
uh, religious groups and anti-porn feminists. So there's a
split within the feminist community. Some see porn as
empowering, uh, useful for women, others think it's degrading
always or, or it is abuse at all times.
So those feminists actually work with religious groups, which
is very unusual. Usually feminists don't find companions and
uh shared values with religious groups, but they do
in this case. The third group that's come in
that I think is really shifting some of this
is manosphere groups. So these are folks who are
making money off of the claims that pornography is
bad for you. So they say, you know, every
time you view, it hurts your brain. Pay me,
I'll help you stop. Pay me, I'll reduce your
urges. And so they've uh actually started partnering with
these other two groups, uh, creating a weird, cause
now these are clearly for-profit. That's why they're there,
that's why they exist. Uh, THEY make a lot
of other claims, but that these are all for-profit
entities. And so now they've created this group where
there's religious anti-porn feminists and kind of manosphere for-profit
businesses, all kind of opposing pornography.
Are these the same people who tend to believe
in porn addiction or tend to identify themselves as
porn addicts or not?
Uh, I don't think in the first two cases
necessarily, but the manosphere groups, absolutely, they tend to
be made up of coaches and their main claim
to expertise is usually personal experience. So they don't
hold any licensure typically, they don't have any training,
relevant training, but they'll say, I personally was harmed
by pornography, pay me and I'll help you stop
viewing too.
Mhm. So last time when we talked about what
predicts identifying as a porn addict, uh, I don't
think we touched on the topic of narcissism. Could
you tell us about that?
That's a really interesting one. There was a history
of research on kind of pornography and people who
think they're addicted, uh, suggesting that they often have
a moral conflict, that's they're raised in a conservative
household, possibly due to religion, but, you know, any
conservative household, and so any porn viewing to them
was viewed as horrible and so I must be
addicted. But now there have been a couple of
us, um, scientists in different studies independently, where we
find narcissism was a better predictor than moral conflict.
And so the way that seems to be manifesting
is all these bad things that happened to me
in my life, you know, I'm having trouble in
school, I can't get a girlfriend, I, all these,
uh, negative outcomes. It's all because of porn. Porn
did this to me. How dare they do this
to me, you know, and that's a very narcissistic
kind of I'm a victim. I do no wrong.
Uh, AND it prohibits, I mean we can get
into this more, but I think in part it
prohibited the self-reflection. It's like, what do I have
control over that I can help myself get a
girlfriend, help myself do better in school cause it's
a very victim mindset, you know, it's like, I,
I clearly didn't do anything wrong cause I'm amazing.
So, you know, what did, what is porn done
to me, uh, done to my brain?
Yeah, that's very interesting. So another thing that also
links to neuroscience in a way, and sometimes I
also, I've also heard from people who oppose pornography
and even some who are part of the no-fa
movement and we're going to get into that in
a bit, is that um The the uh the
big issue has to do with the fact that
pornography induces the release of dopamine and then they
start talking about supposed dopamine addiction or and things
like that. I mean, is dopamine addictive at all?
Dopamine is long villainized and seems to be a
favorite of these coaches. And not just within the
pornography space, incidentally, like there are now kind of
cheesy books written about demonizing dopamine. Uh, DOPAMINE is
involved in everything in our life, kind of from
moment to moment, it's involved in coordinating smooth muscle
movement. Things have nothing to do with that. Uh,
IT'S often confounded. So, uh, if you see someone,
sometimes they'll refer to dopamine as a pleasure chemical.
It was famously in a Nobel laureate effort shown
not to be related, uh, or not underlying pleasure
experiences. It's really about motivation and so any motive
behavior has to do with dopamine. So dopamine is
absolutely involved in addictions, but that's not unique. So
if you say like, oh, you know, porn provokes
dopamine is like, Every motivated provokes dopamine, like it's,
yes, if something is addictive, it does have to
be involved, but that's not um A discriminatory element
of addiction. It, it almost is the weakest argument
you could make. Oh, you know, dopamine's involved, so
it must be addictive like that, that means almost
nothing, you know, it's, it's not a good argument.
But I mean, uh, when we hear people talking
about so-called uh dopamine, uh uh so-called dopamine detox,
does that make any sense?
No, there have been a few uh limited studies
kind of looking at this idea of dopamine detox,
like is that something that happens, uh, and as
best we can tell? Not really, no. So, can
you potentially sensitize yourself through anchoring exercises, that is,
Uh, like if you have a super bland environment,
and we can do these with animal studies where
we create environments that are really deprived versus enriched
and uh you can absolutely see more reactivity, um.
To enriching environments that seems true for both the
animal models and in humans, but it's kind of
like the degree to which you would need to
do that as a human. I don't think we
can really replicate. This is like sitting in a
room with nothing, you know, for extended periods. And
the the detoxes I often see are like, you
know, put your phone aside for a week. That
may not be a bad idea. I don't think
it's gonna change your dopamine reactivity and, and there's
not good evidence for that.
Mhm. So last time we talked about porn addiction,
but what is it that in the scientific literature
is called problematic porn use? What is that?
I think of uh problematic porn uses, sometimes abbreviated
PPU is very similar to television viewing that we
worked on 40 years ago in science, that is,
uh, you can absolutely view enough television that it
interferes with your life, it interferes with you accomplishing
other goals that you value in your life, it's
associated with obesity, um, we have a lot of
programs helping youth view less television, um, and in
those cases, we're saying. There's nothing crazy unique about
the TV, you know, it's like, uh, we initially,
of course, had all kinds of crazy theories about
television, most of which have been cast aside. We
see the same kind of thing with pornography now
where people, oh gosh, you know, pornography has all
these special powers. Probably not, um, but problematic pornography
is just look, you, you can absolutely spend too
much time doing this. You can do it at
the expense of stuff you should be doing instead.
Uh, AND so, is there a way we can
help you engage in things you value more? You
know, can we shift the effort?
Yeah, but, uh, but in what ways is that
different from an addiction? I mean, I was just
wondering because since you mentioned that it could get
in the way of us doing what we have
to do like work, for example, wouldn't that be
a criterion for addiction
or? Yeah, so these lines where we're trying to
distinguish like, what's a problem behavior versus a pathology.
So like any of us can have problem behaviors,
stuff we should do less in our life, and
that may include, like, if I train for a
triathlon, uh, I may be super healthy, but my
wife is at home like, you're not. Providing for
childcare, like you need to stop bike riding for
5 hours on Saturday and provide care so I
can do something for me too. So, uh, we
wouldn't consider the triathlon training addictive, but we'd say
like, look, it's clearly a problem in your context,
like you need to reduce it. So to actually
call it a pathology. Uh, WHEN you discover, uh,
what kind of model of pathology it fits best,
and addiction was one that was explored early on,
then you say, OK, for something to be an
addiction, what are the criteria for an addiction? And
there are different ideas about that, but there's one
by, um, Bridge that's very popular, called an incentive
salience theory of addiction, and it requires, uh, a
number of different constraints, like all these things must
be met for this thing to be called an
addiction. And pornography fails in multiple ways. So, um,
you know, one is kind of the, uh, escalation
over time. We see lots of studies failing to
document escalation when they're longitudinal. Uh, THE other is
a shift, uh, from kind of a pleasure experience
to a more compulsive use expense. Uh, AND to
be fair, those are expensive studies. You have to
follow people at the start of use over a
long period. We don't have those data, we don't
have any evidence that happens, and people who say
they're addicted, they still have a pleasure experience and
we show them pornography. So, uh, it just fails
in a number of different ways to meet criteria
for addiction, but that doesn't mean You can't do
it in a way that interferes with your life
and somebody could help you like do that less.
Right, right. Do people who watch pornography have a
harder time pair bonding with someone?
Uh, SO there have been some associative studies where
they find, for example, people who view more pornography
are less likely to be in marriages, uh, less
likely to have a desired sexual partner, like access
to a partner. But to me, the argument is
much stronger for reverse causality, that is, uh, if
you don't have a partner and you wish you
did, well, it's Friday night, you're lonely, like, I
think I'll masturbate, you know, I kind of have
a sexual urge, got no one to spend it
on, you know, like. So, uh, to me, there's
not good evidence that it's causative. That is, I
view pornography. Therefore, I don't have a partner. Therefore,
I failed to bond with my, uh, marriage partner.
It really seems, uh, if anything, to be more
evidence in the reverse, like in the, the case
of marriage, we see this a lot where, uh,
so I'm also a, a couples therapist, although I
don't see patients currently. And, uh, when people aren't
agreeing in their desire, and we call it desire
discrepancy, uh, what do you do? If you're married
and your intention is to be, uh, with that
just that partner, you don't have an open relationship.
And one partner is like, I don't want sex
that much, you know, once a month is fine
with me, and the other partner is like, I
would really like sex 3 times a week. You're
gonna masturbate more and you're kind of gonna be
unhappy about it because you're like, I really wish,
you know, my partner would have sex with me
more often. Uh, AND I feel a little rejected
and, uh, you know, a little less secure in
myself. And I'm kind of pissed off because I
agreed to just have sex with them and now
they're not having sex with me. So it, it
absolutely makes sense that there's, um, there would be
an apparent relationship between likes satisfaction. And porn viewing
and masturbation, but I think it's really in the
reverse causality in most of those cases, if, if
not all.
Mhm. So, uh, tell us about the research you
have done on no FA groups. So, I mean,
what got you interested in that and how does
it link to the magnosphere?
We study a lot of topics kind of around
there and I saw a number of studies that
were qualitative in nature, that is they were interviewing
people or they were kind of looking at uh
posts in a general way in their forums for
NoFA. And so we wanted to do something quantitative
and actually talk to people who had experience there.
So we started out doing a pre-registered survey, just
an online survey, kind of a simple start to
look at what people's experiences had been. Um, WE
followed up with some systematic analysis, uh, quantifying the
content of their forums, and so there had been
kind of hints before from this qualitative work that
these groups were Uh, you know, claiming to save
women, but then using them as objects to test
their penis out and, uh, saying, you know, uh,
kind of some of the same lines as pickup
artists. You know, it's like, I need to get
laid, I need this, my body needs this. Women
owe me this kind of language. Um, BUT it's
a little different than the pickup artist. So No
FA was co-founded by two different guys. One of
them is a pickup artist and founded a pickup
artist for him separately. Um, SO it makes sense,
like some of that rhetoric is definitely in there.
And so I can talk more about specific studies
or the general effects, but yeah, we've had a
series of studies now about NoFA.
Mhm. So tell us about the, the studies then,
and then I will make, I will probably ask
you a few more questions about it.
OK. The first uh registered study, we just asked
folks, you know, do you know what noFAP is?
And if you, if you did, we let you
in and then we Uh, looked at their experience,
like if they had tried to do one of
these detoxes, um, which they call rebooting, and, uh,
we said, well, what do you consider a relapse?
You know, like, what do you even think that
is? Cause there's a lot of discussion on these
forums where they don't even know. They're like, did
I relapse? Did I not? So, NoFAP was founded
as an anti-masturbation movement. That's very clear. All their
documentation shows that they now say that was never
the case, that was definitely the case, that was
how they were founded. Since then, they've broadened out,
so their treatment manual that they send out recommends
90 days abstinence from porn masturbation orgasm as a
gold standard. They actually call it the gold standard.
I don't know why. I don't know where that
came from, but that's what they decided on. So,
uh, it was relevant, of course, like, what do
you think is a relapse? And it was really
all over the board and interesting to me, like
one of the things a lot of people said
was a relapse was cheating on your partner. I
was like, how does that How is that related
to what you're talking about in this group. So
it, there was a lot of diversity in terms
of what they considered problematic, and then we said
OK, thinking about. If you tried this, thinking about
the last time you experienced a relapse, how did
you feel? You asked them about different emotions. And
the two that really stood out as the, the
most endorsed was shame. So they say it's not
a shaming treatment, but that's exactly what it causes.
People said they experience a lot of uh shame,
uh, so, uh, more so than things like sadness
and anxiety. Uh, THEY also Uh, sometimes reported suicidality.
Now that wasn't endorsed at as high of a
rate, but given that this is not an empirically
supported treatment, anything that causes suicidal ideation is problematic.
So we even had 12 folks out of our,
I think 289 sample, uh, that said it was
extremely suicidal. So this was just their most recent
relapse and they had an extraordinarily negative reaction. Which
is not appropriate. I mean, that's, we shouldn't be
offering this, especially, you know, it's offered for youth,
age 13 and up is who's allowed on the
forums. Uh, I don't want youth exposed to that
messaging, that if you masturbate, you know, you ruined
your brain, and maybe you should kill yourself. Uh,
THAT, I think it's a horrible message for young
men. Uh, WE did a study looking at the
violent content. And this study is often misunderstood, so
I got to get ahead of it a little
bit that, uh, we looked at violent content that
contained explicitly violent words. So we did not try
and quantify all of the potentially violent posts, um,
but we got them off of the Reddit subforums
for NoFA, a comparison forum for stop drinking, and
another, uh, comparison forum, uh, that was porn-free, I
think was the other one. So another kind of
porn related but not their program. And it was,
uh, remarkable how much more violent than no fat
was. And, uh, so sometimes I think, uh, of
all of the posts that we found that were
violent, people say, oh, you know, that was over
11 years, that's really few posts, given that these
are some of the worst of the worst though.
This is not a survey of all violent posts.
There are many, many more, uh, ones that like,
I personally know of many, many more than that
didn't that our Uh, the particular search terms that
we use for that systematic review. And interestingly, uh,
some of the most common targets of those violent
posts were other forum users, which I didn't expect.
So, Uh, there were things like, uh, somebody comes
on and says, hey, you know, I'm really fighting
my urge. I'm really struggling right now. Someone chimes
in, uh, if you touch yourself, I have your
IP address and I'll come shoot you in the
head. What? You know, I, I don't think they
actually have their IP address, and even if you
did, it wouldn't necessarily show where they were. But,
you know, those kind of posts have no place
in a recovery forum. Like, what is that about?
Um, AND since then, like we've discovered. We missed
an important key term. A lot of them were
talking about self-harm and punching themselves in the genitals.
So since then, like I added a punch search
term and I've updated our database, um, cause a
lot of those have that kind of violent content.
Um, SO, yeah, we've done a few other, uh,
studies as well, kind of looking at, um, something
called DOT syndrome that kind of started in India
and has spread into Pakistan and then we have
a paper in the UK. And it appears noFAP
has kind of brought DOT syndrome into the states.
So dot is uh kind of unreasonable, um, uh,
pathological fear of ejaculation. That is, you think you're
losing your life force, this is harming me. Uh,
SO it's a not a semen retention practice in
like a religious sense, but a really like neurotic
fear of one's own normal body responses, and it's,
it is diagnosed with the pathology and Uh, international
classification disorders, and so, uh, we see a lot
of evidence for this kind of posts in NoFAP
also, so it really seems like they've brought this
neuroses into America. Uh, WE don't need more neuroses.
Yeah. Uh, BUT addressing the main claims made by
noA groups, of course, they have to do with
semen retention. What do, what kinds of claims do
they make about that? And are there any real
benefits to semen retention?
Uh, SO they often try and distance themselves from
semen retention communities, which is funny because you can
see they're often fighting people on their forums that
are advocating for that practice, uh, especially if it's
for religious reasons, um, they'll say that's not what
we do, that's not who we are, but then
a lot of the argumentation is the same, so.
I can see, uh, there are many scholars who've
lumped them together like NoFA being the same as
other semen retention groups, uh, and then others who
clearly try and separate them. So, uh, and there's
not a bright line between them in terms of
practice, but I know they try to create a
line.
Mhm. Yeah, but, uh, I mean about the, the
kinds of claims they make, what, what, what do
they tend to say about men,
I mean, the founding, the the way NoFA got
actually started was they got the claim off of
a bodybuilding forum that were abstaining from ejaculation because
they thought it increased their testosterone levels and then
would result in increased muscular gains and the opposite
is true. That is, uh, when you're more sexually
active, you tend to have higher on average testosterone
titers. I don't think that's enough to affect muscular
gain. It's actually, like it's still within physiological ranges,
um, doesn't do anything crazy to ejaculate a bunch.
So, uh, as far as we know. So, uh,
the kind of central claim, how they were founded,
uh, seems not to hold water. Uh, AND there
was some, uh, claims related to a Chinese study
that was actually recently retracted. And uh they still
sometimes try and link to that study and say,
oh, you know, that the core thing still exists
in this other Chinese journal, but it doesn't. It's
a different study. Uh, YOU know, we explored that
and so the claim is just not, not well
supported and then the opposite is probably true.
Right, but are there any real benefits to? Yeah,
I mean, I'm strugg you can hear me struggling
a little bit because I'm like, not really, um,
so the, I mean you could think if I'm
trying to be expansive here, like, uh, part of
what NoFA seems to be doing is giving men
and boys uh feeling of control, so. Uh, I
can control my body. I'm the boss. I tell
it what to do. I control my urges. Uh,
AND self-regulation is not a bad thing, you know,
I mean, that's, uh, part of growing up is
we learn not to scream when we feel like
screaming. So it's uh, uh, you could argue that's
not, uh, inherently bad, but it's kind of how
you go about it, you know, how do you
develop emotion regulation. Uh, AND I would argue there's,
as far as I know, there's not any evidence
that gaining that kind of, kind of mastery, as
they often call it, uh, confers any actual advantage
or actually impacts like emotion regulation more broadly or
anything like that.
Is there anything that happens to people physiologically, for
example, when they go for a very long period
of time without sex?
A very, very long time, sure. So, uh, there
are fertility factors and the ejaculate that decrease if
you don't come for a very, very long time.
But this is on the order of like years.
So, uh, so yeah, fair point if you extend
it that far. Uh, AND similarly, like you'll, um,
there is uh some degradation of the, uh, tissue
around genital organs that will degrade at a more
rapid rate and people who aren't experiencing any kind
of sexual stimulation. So it's not just not having
a partner, but it's like you're not masturbating. If
you do nothing, you know, if you're really hands
off. Uh, FOR years, periods, you can definitely get
degradation of tissues in the genitals because there's, it's
a bit of a use it or lose it
situation like the muscles can degrade, the tissues, uh,
aren't as pliable. We see those kind of problems.
Mhm. Um, WHAT distinguishes what happens in the early
phases of arousal versus when one reaches orgasm, I
mean, at the level of the brain.
We are working on that. The bottom line is
we don't know, and there have been only a
few studies that have followed the brain through climax,
and whenever you see a study make claims about
what happens in the brain at climax, you got
to be very, very skeptical. Because, uh, when climax
happens, even if the head doesn't move, the face
muscles move, all of that creates artifacts that interfere
with functional magnetic resonance imaging, interfere with electroencephalography, and
because they're not happening repeatedly, they're very, very difficult
to get out of the signals. So when someone
says, oh, the brain does this at climax, maybe.
You know, like there's, there's a lot of noise
to get through. So we got really interested in
the period preceding it, like what happens leading up
to it. And part of why this was happening
is we were studying women initially, and we normally
expect people when they're getting aroused, uh, you know,
getting more and more and more excited until something
happens and you have a climax. That's how Masters
and Johnson wrote it. And uh one of the
measures we had was sympathetic nervous system activity through
galvanic skin response typically measured in the palms or
the soles of the feet where there are a
lot of equine glands. And so you would see
these go up and up and up, but then
when we'd say, OK, try to have a climax
if you can, it fell off and like what
was that? Did our instrument fall off like And
as we got to digging into this, we think
it's a real effect. That is, there seem to
be really distinct phases where trying to get aroused
is a real effortful experience where you have to
pay attention, think of something as sexual, elaborate on
it in your mind, and when you try to
get to climax, it's the opposite. You kinda got
to let your brain do its thing and the
broad thing we think is going on. His orgasm
in the brain, as best we know, looks a
lot like seizure activity. There's a lot of synchronous
firing. You don't want to be in that state
unless it's safe to do so. So our suspicion
is there's a reduction in cognitive control and a
reduction in neuro control that has to occur to
allow the synchronous firing to trigger, and, and that
seems like a, a very reasonable kind of safety
mechanism. Where is it like, OK, are we in
a space where this can happen and I'm not
gonna get eaten by a lion if you want
to go evolutionary, uh, or in a space where,
you know, like I'm attracted to this person and
they're not gonna assault me. Everything is as I
want it to be. I feel good. Um, LET'S,
let's go there, brain, you know, so, so there
really seems to be a shift and we have
reasonable documentation of it in women, and we've just
started a study in men. We have 4 right
now. And we're looking for a similar kind of
signature and guys, we've seen some of it in
a couple of male subjects and piloting, but that's
what we're, we're really looking to see in part
in this new study.
Great. Uh, THIS pornography activate the same areas of
the brain as sex with a partner, and if
so, what does that mean exactly?
Uh, THERE'S a lot of overlap and also distinction,
so they're both mainly activating the salience network areas
of the brain, that is, uh, Areas of the
brain that link together to say like, hey, we
need to pay attention to that, we might need
to respond to this. Uh, THAT is generally the
network that's involved in emotional experiences. So that's ultimately
what we think emotions are for. It's like directing
our attention and preparing to act if we need
to. So, uh, both pornography and, uh, partnered sex
activate those brain areas, at least early on, um.
They uh prepare us to act the motor strip
areas of the brain that is the kind of
signify, um, the homunculus if you've ever seen a
mapping because it's, it's very cortical, very much on
the outside. Um, THERE are areas for the genitals.
Those are activated both by viewing pornography, touching those
spaces as well as some actual touching, which is
kind of interesting and potentially a mirror issue. Um,
BUT there are also distinctions from things like, you
know, I'm having an interaction with a person. I
feel that person desires me, uh, that I don't
get from pornography. Uh, THERE are touch, uh, specific
sensors that are noticing that someone is stroking me
in a way that is intended to be sexual
or is likely to be sexual. That's a distinct
area of the brain. So, uh, there are some
that is, uh, that may be unique and distinct.
I think it's largely overlap. Uh, THE biggest distinction
is in magnitude, that is someone who's interacting with
a partner, all of those salient areas are gonna
be activated much more strongly. It's I think maybe
the bottom line.
Right. So, I mean, it's clear, I guess that
psychologically and neurologically, we pretty much distinguish between watching
pornography and having sex, right.
Yeah, there's some clear distinctions, uh, and it's always
kind of a hard answer cause it's, they're not
totally distinct for sure, but they're also not the
same and just more of. There are some qualitative
differences, but, uh, it's a largely, uh, uh kind
of a magnitude difference for the most active areas
of the brain.
Right. Do women really have multiple orgasms?
Oh man, I don't know. So I always say
when people say multiple, I was like, what do
you mean? When you say multiple, what is a
multiple? So if I have a climax, go get
a drink of water, come back and have another
13 minutes later. Was that a multiple? If I
have one, and then I lose my erection, and
then it comes back and I have, was that
a multiple if it was 2 minutes later, uh,
does it have to be on the same erection?
Does it have to be? So number one is
like, we don't have an agreed on definition of
what constitutes multiple. Um, I will say, I don't
think this idea that like women can have multiple
and men don't. I, I don't think it's accurate.
And in large part, uh, it's because when we
were testing women looking at their, uh, orgasmic response,
about half the women, when they said they were
having a climax, we didn't see physiological evidence for
it. That is, we didn't see the stereotype contractions
that occur in the pel. THIS. So I, I
don't doubt that they're having fun. I don't want
to rain on that parade, but uh they are
not having the same uh kind of contractions that
also elicit things that pace copulation. So, some of
the things that uh occur in the body when
we have an orgasm cause that refractory period that
may allow us or not to have multiple orgasms
or have them in close proximity at least. So
if half the women aren't actually having these stop
signals from uh, uh, I'm gonna call it true
climax, uh uh physiological climax, um. You know, then,
then, of course, they're gonna look like they're having
multiple orgasms and the guys will look like they're
not. But if we limited it to just women
that are having those experiences, I think they're gonna
look a lot like men. That is, there's gonna
be a distribution where some people can have orgasms
pretty close in time because they have a really
short refractory period. Mhm.
That's yeah. That's very interesting. So let me just
ask you about one last topic, and then I
will probably have one other final question. Uh, COULD
you tell us about the work you've been doing?
And I know this is very early in your,
in the, in the research you're doing on this
topic, but the work you've been doing on post
orgasmic syndrome, I mean, what it is, what you
think is happening there,
etc. Post orgasmic illness syndrome, we think mainly affects
men. It's the experience of having flu-like symptoms for
2 to 7 days after every climax, regardless of
how it's experienced. That is partnered masturbation, doesn't matter
for these guys. There was a history of research
in this space that was typically very small samples.
One of the leaders in this space, uh, Marcel
Waldinger recently passed, and they had a lot of
theories about um an auto-allergen and the ejaculate. That
is, they thought maybe when these guys are having
a climax, there's something in their semen that's causing
them to react. And as a result of that,
they were doing things like auto inoculation, that is
injecting their semen back into themselves. And there were
case reports of these things. Uh, IN general, these
studies tend to be just really tiny, not well
replicated. And the mechanisms weren't strong, so that is,
they were making some guesses, as one does with
a rare disorder, you know, you kinda gotta start
somewhere, but they didn't have great promise to my
mind as something that was likely to be a
solution for a variety of reasons, but in part
it's like, well, the ejaculate didn't just come out,
it was in your body before. Like, what is
it about it coming out that you think caused
the allergic reaction that So there were details like
that that weren't clear. So our study is uh
recruiting a large sample of men who struggle with
this issue and also control men who don't have
this issue at all, and we're gonna be comparing
them on a series of inflammatory cytokines, uh, so
we have, uh, we're getting all kinds of data
from these generous guys. Uh, SO we're getting saliva
blood samples, ejaculate samples, and we're looking for differences
in inflammatory response that we think likely underlie this
disorder, but we don't know. I mean, that's why
we're looking, uh, it is considered a rare disorder
that's, um, the funders are from the National Organization
of Rare Disorders and the Fulton Family Foundation. So,
uh, we're very glad to have the ability to
do that work. It's very, very rare, especially in
the states to be able to do that.
So let me just ask you one final question
then about your work in general. I mean, is
it easy to do this kind of research? I
mean, in terms of getting grants for it and
particularly in the US is the cultural context uh
ideal for this kind of research or
not? God, no. So we always have a toss
up because our European colleagues are a lot more
free to do this kind of work, but they
also, their federal grants tend to be much smaller.
So it's, they can ask a lot more of
these questions, but they can't necessarily do it in
kind of a big science way. But we can't
either because we can't get those giant grants here
that do exist. So, uh, you know, it's a
bit of a, a tossup. Most people who get
trained to do this kind of work in the
states will leave. So a lot of them go
to Canada. Uh, BECAUSE of some of the challenges,
we also have, uh, a very serious problem with
violent threats. So, uh, you know, I've had serious
issues around that a number of my colleagues have,
especially related to the study of pornography, uh, less
so with some of the other projects, but, uh,
our religious persuasion is quite strong in the states
and they do not want this work done. If
it says anything might be OK about sex outside
of marriage, masturbation in general, and viewing pornography. Uh,
IF you don't stop doing your work, they will
try and stop you from doing your work. And,
uh, that is a tremendous problem in the states
that I don't think is faced to that extent
anywhere else.
Right, so just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find your work
on the Internet?
Yeah, you can always find me at LinkedIn. I'll
be there forever. But I'm, most of my stuff
these days is uh Librocenter.com that has a link
out to whatever socials we have going. So that's
L I B E R O Senter all one
word dot com.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show again. It's
always a pleasure to talk
with you. Thanks for the great informed questions. I
really appreciate that.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbo, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.